
--- Page 1 ---
conditions, but little has been done to explore these issues in large
electronic health records data sources that include dental healthrecords. Here we report on our exploration of data readiness andcompleteness of three of these data sources in the Clinical andTranslational Science Awards (CTSA) network. METHODS/STUDY POPULATION: Three CTSAs from the Consortium ofRural States (CORES) with diverse geographies, demographics,and data ecosystems can integrate medical and dental records, butit is unknown if the target population having both dental and medicalrecords have sufficient completeness and similarity to enable dental/medical health studies. Here we use descriptive analytics to charac-terize the demographics, and the “complete data ”approach pre-
sented by Weber et al. to evaluate differences between thecompleteness of the general populations and the one having bothdental/medical records. We accomplish this by identifying patientswith dental records in commonly used research networks and per-forming empirical patient statistics in comparison to the entire pop-ulation available at the three institutions. RESULTS/ANTICIPATEDRESULTS: This poster will present the results of using the Weberet al. approach to compare the completeness of records of the generalpatient population in the Iowa, Kentucky, and Utah medical/dentalhealth care systems to those for which they have also dental records.The completeness of the records of these two subpopulations is alsoassociated with different demographic characteristics, as it has beenestablished that the populations served by the dental clinics is biasedby dental insurance considerations. The work will show what retro-spective studies can (or not) be done using these populations whentaking into account that it is well established that studies of popula-tions with different level of completeness can be inconsistent.
DISCUSSION/SIGNIFICANCE OF IMPACT: This study provides
an informatics framework to assess similarity and completeness ofpatient records with and without dental records. Establishing thelevel of similarity and completeness in these patient populations iscritical to justify the validity of studies that utilize a combined record.
358
Rare disease study identification (RDSI): A naturallanguage processing assisted search and visualizationtool for clinical studies of rare diseases
Michael Lin1, Jennifer Weis1, H M Abdul Fattah2and Jungwei Fan1
1Mayo Clinic and2University of Arizona
OBJECTIVES/GOALS: Identifying and indexing rare disease studies
is labor intensive, especially in research centers with a large number
of trials. To address this gap, we applied natural language processing
(NLP) and visualization techniques to develop an efficient pipelineand user-friendly web interface. Our goal is to offer the rare diseasestudy identification (RDSI) tool for adoption by other sites.METHODS/STUDY POPULATION: The RDSI retrieves studyinformation (short and long titles, study abstract) from the IRB sys-tem. These descriptive fields are then processed by the MetaMap LiteNLP program for identifying disease terms and standardizing themto UMLS concepts. By terminology identifier mapping, the diseasesintersecting with concepts in rare disease databases (Genetic andRare Disease program and Orphanet) are further scored to pinpointstudies that focus on a rare disease. The web interface displays a scat-ter bubble chart as an overview of all the rare diseases, with each bub-ble size proportional to the number of studies for that disease. Inaddition to the visual navigation, users can search studies by diseasename, PI, or IRB number. Search results contain detailed study infor-
mation as well as the evidence used by algorithms of the pipeline.RESULTS/ANTICIPATED RESULTS: The RDSI identificationresults and functions were verified manually and spot-checked byseveral study investigators. The web interface is a self-contained sol-ution available to our staff for various use cases like reporting or envi-ronment scan. We have built in a versioning mechanism that logs thedate of each major result in the process. Therefore, even as the raredisease data sources evolve over time, we will be able to preserve anyhistorical context or perform updates as needed. The RDSI outputsare replicated to Mayo Clinic ’s enterprise data warehouse daily,
allowing tech-savvy users to leverage any useful intermediate resultsat the backend. We anticipate the performance of the rare diseaseidentification to be further enhanced by employing the advance-ments in AI technology. DISCUSSION/SIGNIFICANCE OFIMPACT: The RDSI represents an informatics solution that offersefficiency in identifying and navigating rare disease clinical studies.It features the use of public databases and open-source tools, man-ifesting return on investment from the broad translational scienceecosystem. These considerations are informative and adoptable byother institutions.
359
Differentiating opioid use disorder from healthy controlsvia ML analysis of rs-fMRI networks
Ahmed Temtam1, Megan A. Witherow1, Liangsuo Ma2,M
Shibly Sadique1, F. Gerard Moeller4, C. Kenneth, Dianne Wright5and
Khan M. Iftekharuddin6
1Vision Lab, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Old Dominion
University, Norfolk, VA, USA;2Institute of Drug and Alcohol Studies,
Richmond, VA, USA, Department of Psychiatry;3Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA;4Institute of Drug
and Alcohol Studies, Richmond, VA, USA, Department of Psychiatry,Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA,Department of Neurology, Virginia Commonwealth University, VA,United States;
5Center for Clinical and Translational Research,
Virginia Commonwealth University, VA, United States and6Dept. Of
Electrical Engineering, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA, USA,Data Science Institute, Old Dominion University, Virginia Beach, VA,USA
OBJECTIVES/GOALS: This work aims to identify functional brain
networks that differentiate opioid use disorder (OUD) subjects fromhealthy controls (HC) using machine learning (ML) analysis of rest-
ing-state fMRI (rs-fMRI). We investigate the default mode network
(DMN), salience network (SN), and executive control network(ECN), as well as demographic features. METHODS/STUDYPOPULATION: This work uses high-resolution rs-fMRI data froma National Institute on Drug Abuse study (IRB #HM20023630) with31 OUD and 45 HC subjects. We extract rs-fMRI blood oxygenationlevel-dependent (BOLD) features from the DMN, SN, and ECN. TheBoruta ML algorithm identifies statistically significant features andbrain activity mapping visualizes regions of heightened neural activ-ity for OUD. We conduct fivefold cross-validation classificationexperiments (OUD vs. HC) to assess the discriminative power offunctional network features with and without incorporating demo-graphic features. Demographic features are ranked based on ML clas-sification importance. Follow-up Boruta analysis is performed tostudy the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), posterior cingulate110 JCTS 2025 Abstract Supplement