
--- Page 1 ---
Contextual Variation of Clinical Notes induced by EHR Migration   
Kurt  Miller , MS1,2, Sungrim  Moon , PhD1, Sunyang Fu, PhD1, Hongfang Liu, PhD1 
1Department  of Artificial Intelligence and Informatics, Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN, USA  
2Bioinformatics and Computation al Biology  Program , University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA  
 
Abstract  
 
The structure and semantics of clinical notes var y considerably across different Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
systems, sites, and institutions. Such  heterogeneity hampers the portability  of natural language processing  (NLP) 
models  in extracting  information from the text for clinical research or practice . In this study, we evaluate the 
contextual variation of clinical notes by measuring the  semantic and syntactic similarity of the notes of two sets of 
physicians comprising four medical specialties across EHR migrations at two Mayo Clinic sites. We find significant 
semantic and syntactic variation imposed by the context of the EHR system and between medical specialties whereas 
only minor variation is caused by variation of spatial context  across sites. Our findings suggest that clinical 
language  models need  to account for process differences at the specialty sublanguage level to be generalizable.  
 
Introduction  
 
The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act of 2009 has brought about 
widespread adoption of Electronic Health Record (EHR) usage as well as sweeping  changes  to healthcare data 
collection, storage, and retrieval1 with the intent to promote the “meaningful use” of EHRs by physicians as well as 
enable secondary research efforts , even among incentive -ineligible hospitals2. However, ample evidence exists that 
these facilitating changes have been accompanied by differences in information recording, productivity and sharing 
practices by clinicians , revealing considerable  discrepancies across institutions and their respective EHR 
implementations3, 4. For example, Edwards et al.5 reported that a significant portion of physician notes contained 
missing or mislabeled sections and subsections in a corpus of outpatient notes. Cohen et  al.6 revealed considerable 
variation between the documentation of physicians within the same practice, clinical setting and note types  in a large 
cohort of primary care physicians.  
 
Since much of information about a patient narrative driving provider investigation is locked in unstructured cl inical 
note text, un derstanding the differences across EHRs  and institutions  at the sublanguage level  is critical  for efforts 
toward standardization. Clinical natural language processing (NLP)  application s which aim  to classify arbitrary 
clinical text into common document ontologies require discernable patterns in language for the level of  performance 
sufficient to translate trained language models into portable  applications . Heterogeneity of language across EHRs 
and institutions  damper s these efforts by confounding language model ability to conform outside medical records 
across institutions as well as to generalize across institutions and subspecialties . Several studies have confirmed that 
the considerable heterogen eity of EHR system usage  across  different EHR software implementations  institutions has 
a significant effect on the performance of these  models on an assortment  of tasks  and case studies7-9. Patterson and 
Hurdle10 illuminated significant differences in the vocabularies of medical specialty sublanguages through distinctly 
formed document clusters by medical specialty.  Doing -Harris et al.11 extended that work  by applying document 
clustering across subspecialties of different institutions, noting complications with documents that express multiple 
sublanguages, naming conventions, and document type incongruities.  Further, national sublanguage trends  have 
shown t o drift  and acutely change with trends over time12 as well as with clinical sublanguage semantics13, 14. 
 
While enforcement of universal documentation standards would alleviate the need for such generalizability of 
language models, r econciliation of the vario us types of heterogeneity across EHRs and institutions is currently 
pursued by building clinical NLP systems that are interoperable. Elkin et al.15 defined three levels of interoperability 
based on the previous work of Charles Morris: syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic interoperability.  More recently, 
Sohn et al.16 and Fu et al.9 leveraged the definitions of these levels of interoperability to measure variation/similarity 
between EHRs , each finding significant variation between the compared EHR corpora  for asthma and post -surgical 
complication terms, respectively . Moon et al.17 gauged the coverage of cardio vascular medicine concept terms 
received in outside medical records against Mayo Clinic concepts, finding that while there was overlap, a significant 
portion of the concepts were not recognized and therefore were not utilized once imported. Though these st udies 
demonstrated differences using concepts specific to their case studies, further analysis is needed into the effect of 
1155
--- Page 2 ---
differences in clinical documentation patterns caused by the each of the contextual dimensions of the clinical 
practice. An examinat ion measuring more precisely the effects of context would facilitate pursuits toward portable 
NLP models needed for automated information sharing between institutions to build patient -level models for 
information extraction, information retrieval, and pred iction applications, among many others.  Furthermore, an 
understanding of contextual variation  would contribute to broader theoretical NLP efforts by demonstrating how 
nuanced d eviations  across space, time, and  institutional process influence language and should be accounted for in 
the processing of it.  
 
The current study aims to better understand whether differences in spatial, temporal, and practic al contexts 
significantly influence provider semantics and narrative structure  of clinical documentation. We compar ed lexical, 
semantic, and process variations across Mayo Clinic EHR system migration from the Cerner EHR to Epic EHR as 
well as between two sites , Mayo Clinic Arizona (MCA)  and Mayo Clinic Florida (MCF)  for a selected subset of 
medical specialties. To our kno wledge, this is the first attempt to compare sublanguages of a selected set of 
physicians over an EHR migration  (i.e., temporal) or across specialities (i.e., practice) at multiple sites (i.e., spatial ) 
of an institution sharing the same integrated data repository . This expands on  the work of Fu et al.9 and Sohn et al.16 
by comparing across Mayo Clinic sites, EHR systems,  and specialties. While the current investigation  lacks the 
granular analysis of those case studies, it instead highlights the effect that differences in context has  on physicians.  
 
Materials and Methods  
Study design  
Our examination uses several Mayo Clinic corpora t o assess  differences in sublanguage  characteristic s across the 
various practice setting s in which physicians of Mayo Clinic function. We investigate  variations in language use 
before and after  the migration of EHR systems from Cerner EHR to the Epic EHR and across two sites, MCA and 
MCF . We define the crit eria for physician selection and the bases for comparison below. Table 1  lists the timeframe  
of each EHR collection at each site as well the  total number of physicians and in each specialty.  To allow the 
comparison of corpora across sites as accurately as possible, we matched the number of physicians in each specialty.  
The study was considered exempted by Mayo Clinic IRB Board with the record number: 20-001137 “ Corpus -based 
Natural Language Processing based on Big Data and Machine Learning ”. 
 
Provider selection  
We compared 87 attending physicians at each site practic ing in one of four medical specialties: internal medicine, 
emergency medicine, gastroenterology and hepatology, or neurology. Providers included for sublanguage 
examination were selected only if they started serving as an attending physician prior to the s tart of the window for 
collection from the Cerner EHR, January 1, 2017, and remained in practice at the same Mayo Clinic site through the 
end of the Epic study period, December 31, 2019. Physicians who had too few notes (n < 200) for either period or 
had a  three times difference  between notes collected during either period were also excluded from consideration.  
 
Table 1. Corpus study period and physician count  for each Mayo Clinic EHR, site, and medical specialty  used. 
 Arizona  Florida  
 Cerner  Epic  Cerner  Epic  
Study Period  1/1/17 – 12/31/17  1/1/19 - 12/31/19  1/1/17 – 12/31/17  1/1/19 - 12/31/19  
Internal Medicine  31 31 
Emergency Medicine  13 13 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology  20 20 
Neurology  23 23 
Total Physicians  87 87 
 
Corpora collection and preprocessing  
The clinical notes for each set of selected physicians were retrieved from the Unified Data Platform (UDP), Mayo 
Clinic’s integrated enterprise data warehouse containing all Mayo Clinic sites’ data for each EHR. Word tokens, 
Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) concept semantic types and semantic group counts were collected for 
each section and aggregated to each document.  Words and sentences were tokenized using the scikit -learn18 and 
1156
--- Page 3 ---
medspacy19 python libraries, respectively . Punctuation, dates , and spaces were not counted as word tokens . UMLS 
concepts were matched using the QuickUMLS20 python library . An implementation of the ConText21 algorithm 
using a custom set of rules from the MedTagger Information Extraction pipeline22 was applied to tag concepts with 
their negation, hypothetical, and experiencer contextual modifiers . Sections were determined using the NLP -as-a-
service toolkit  according to the Health Level 7 section standard . Report header sections, containing physician and 
patient metadata, were removed before further calculations were performed  once the section information was 
ascertained . 
 
Dimensions of Clinical Context  
In our attempt  to quantify  the degree of change across corpora that is influenced by context  from the perspective of 
the physician , we consider the impact of  three dimensions of context , formally defined in Table 2 . 
 
Table 2. Definitions of contextual dimensions  
Context Dimension  Definition  
Practic al context  Factors  from  the set of note types, sections, templates used within the given institution, 
EHR implementation and medical specialty.  
Spatial context  Factors  dictated by the practice setting’s geographical locale such as patient population 
demographic variation , natio nal and local laws, nearby competing healthcare institutions  
Temporal context  Factors  varying over time pertaining to the development and prognosis of a patient’s 
condition or the public perception about the condition at a given point in tim e. 
 
The confluence of these contextual dimensions in each physician’s practice setting determines th e set of facts 
needed to interpret their clinical notes . In this analysis, the practic al and temporal contexts  are altered by the EHR 
migration from Cerner to Epic and the passage of time from 2017 to 2019, respectively, whereas the spatial context 
varies through  Arizona and Florida regional differences.  By comparing these corpora, we attempt to assess the 
degree to which physician documentation is influenced by these aspects of context.  
 
Measurements of Clinical Corpus Variation  
Process  Variation  
Variation of process here is adopted from previous work to refer to overall structural (i.e. syntactic) differences 
between physician documentation23. To measure  the degree to which the physician practice process differs due the 
context of the  EHR, we collected corpus statistics for each of the Cerner and Epic  EHR s for the same set of 
physici ans who met the inclusion criteria at the two Mayo Clinic sites . This included the total number of documents 
and sections as well as the unique number of note types. The total number of word tokens in each corpus was used to 
calculate the rate s of word s per document  and words per concept, as noted below . 
 
Semantic Variation  
The source of variation by UMLS semantic group was of paramount  interest. For this measurement, we aggregated 
concepts by UMLS semantic group and compared the rate of words per concept semantic group across sites. To 
limit the breadth of this analysis to terms most rel evant to clinica l practice , however, w e focused on four of the 
thirteen  UMLS semantic groups:  Anatomy (ANAT ), Chemicals & Drugs (CHEM) , Disorders  (DISO), and 
Procedures (PROC). A preliminary Kolmogorov -Smirnov normality test reject ed the null hypothesis of normality 
for both the AZ (p<0.001) and FL  (p<0.001) corpora . Hence, t he rates of each practi tioner ’s words to these 
clinically -relevant concepts  and groups  were tested for s tatistical significance using the Wilcoxon signed -rank test .  
We also sought to examine this semantic variati on at the specialty level at each site and EHR. For this comparison, 
we measured the rates of concepts per word for each semantic group across four selected medical specialties 
comprising both primary and secondary  care.  The areas included for this purpose  were internal medicine, emergency 
medicine, gastroenterology and hepatology, and neurology.  
 
In comparing the effect of the spatial context by measuring differences  across M CA and MCF  site corpora, we adapt 
the definition of semantic variation from Sohn e t al.16 by implemen ting the class -based approach established  by 
Grootendorst24 to assess lexical similarity  using both  standard tf-idf as well as a modified version accounting for the 
thematic medical specialty of the clinical note we call stf-idf. First the overall tf-idf was calculated using  the sum of 
the tf (t) ∙ idf(t) for eac h term t: ∑𝑡𝑓𝑖(𝑡)∙𝑖𝑑𝑓(𝑡)/𝑁 𝑖  , where  
1157
--- Page 4 ---
𝑡𝑓𝑖(𝑡)∙𝑖𝑑𝑓(𝑡)=# term  𝑡 in doc 𝑖
total  # terms  in doc 𝑖 ∙log(total  # docs  in corpus  𝑁
total  # docs  with  term  𝑡 in corpus) 
 
Next, we calculated the  specialty term frequency -inverse document frequency  (stf-idf), which  weighs the term 
frequency by  author physician  specialty to adjust for variations in specialty lexicons . This overall  stf-idf of each 
corpus was calculated using  the sum of stf (t) ∙ idf(t) for each term t: ∑𝑠𝑡𝑓𝑠(𝑡)∙𝑖𝑑𝑓(𝑡)/𝑁 𝑠  , where  
 
𝑠𝑡𝑓𝑠(𝑡)∙𝑖𝑑𝑓(𝑡)=# term  𝑡 in specialty  𝑠
total  # terms  in specialty  𝑠 ∙log(total  # docs  in corpus  𝑁
total  # docs  with  term  𝑡 in corpus) 
 
Here, the term frequency is calculated across each specialty s with respect to the total number of terms in the given  
medical specialty  s, as opposed to the total number of terms in the document . As an example, a colon su rgery such 
as intestinal anastomosis  might be  discussed several times in a clinical note but represent a small fraction of al l 
patient procedures in the overall corpus . The stf-idf algorithm would more accurately ca pture the consistency of the 
surgery  in the context of the site’s GI department  as op posed to a general reflection of the number of times a 
procedure is repeated i n a note.  Thus, t his scoring approach is intended to measure  more precisely  the salience of 
each term within each specialty instead of each document, since we suspect that  the salience of a term to a document 
may depends excessively on the particularities of the patient case and specific encounter.  The idf weight ing in each 
of the  equations is the same, as the log of the total number of documents in the corpus N is divided by the total 
number of documents with term t in the corpus, irrespective of specialty. To illustrate the validity of this method, we 
present the descending -order ed top ranked terms of each specialty across site and EHR, removing any provider -
specific terms. The cosine similarity of each of these  scores is calculated between the different EHR corp ora at each 
site as well as the across MCA and MCF sites to assess their general likeness . 
 
Results  
Process  Variation  
The overall corpus statistics, as well as the total UMLS concept and individual semantic group frequencies, are 
listed in Table 3 . At both sit es, more documents were found for the Cerner EHR than for the Epic EHR.  The unique 
number of sections did not remarkably differ (Arizona: Cerner=43, Epic= 44; Florida: Cerner=44, Epic=48), but the 
number  of sections per document was consistently greater in Epic than Cerner at both sites  (Arizona: Cerner= 4, 
Epic= 5; Florida: Cerner= 2, Epic= 5). The number of unique note types used in each EHR differed by about an order 
of magnitude (Arizona: Cerner=240, Epic=26; Florida: Cerner=270, Epic=27) . This difference is  attributed to the 
freedom given to providers to create note types in addition to catch -all categories as “Miscellaneous Note” and 
procedure specific categories such as “EGD”, as displayed in Figure 2 and Figure 3 . 
Table 3. Corpus variation across EHR migration  
Metric  Mayo Clinic Arizona  Mayo Clinic Florida  
Cerner  Epic  p-value* Cerner  Epic  p-value* 
Total Documents 66781  56454   74874  56961   
Total Sections  344063  288774   322802  266653   
Unique Note Types  240 26  271 27  
Unique sections  43 44  44 48  
Sections per document , media n 
(IQR)  4 (7) 5 (4)  2 (5) 5 (4)  
Words per document, median (IQR)  420 (628)  515 (522)   262 (508)  423 ( 479)  
Words per concept  4.53 3.44 <0.001  4.034  3.290  <0.001  
Words per ANAT  27.60  19.22  <0.001  23.81  18.02  <0.001  
Words per CHEM  26.45  18.90  0.013 28.24  20.43  0.416 
Words per DISO  10.08  7.80 <0.001  8.54 7.14 <0.001 
Words per PROC  21.09  17.47  <0.001  18.76  16.83  0.168 
IQR: Interquartile range, ANAT : Anatomy, CHEM : Chemicals & Drugs, DISO : Disorders, PROC : Procedures  
*Determined using Wilcoxon signed -rank test for every set of paired physician migration timeframe samples  
 
1158
--- Page 5 ---
 
Figure 2 . MCA Note Type distributions in descending order of relative frequency  
Figure 3 . MCF Note Type distributions in descending order of relative frequency  
Semantic Variation  
The rate of total word tokens to total UMLS concepts as well as the rates of total word tokens to each (of the four 
pertinent) UMLS semantic groups is listed in Table 3. For each of the MCA and MCF sites, the p-values of each of 
the comparisons of Cerner E HR to Epic EHR, as measured by the Wilcoxon signed -rank of physician document 
collections before and after the migration, are listed in the column adjacent to the overall rates. Of the five 
measurements conducted at each site, we observed statistically significan t differences in all paired sets except for 
words per chemicals and drugs concept (p=0.41 6) and words per procedure concept ( p=0.168) for MCF using 
alpha=0.05. While words per chemicals and drugs concept ( p=0.01 3) for MCA was not a statistically sign ificant 
difference, the difference between that probability and other words per concept rates was notable.  
The rates of UMLS concepts per word for ANAT, CHEM, DISO, and PROC semantic groups for each of the four 
specialties are illustrated in Figure 4. Thes e graphs illustrate the inverse of the words -per-concept rates of Table 2 
but at the granularity of the specialty for each site; the higher the rate of semantic concepts per word, the greater the 
density of those concepts in the notes (i.e. the more freque ntly those concepts are mentioned in the notes). The 
graphs are shown this way to convey that a larger bar has a relatively higher density of concept term mentions in the 
notes. At each site, the figure shows a considerable relative increase in the rate of  DISO concepts per word for 
Emergency Medicine and for Gastroenterology and Hepatology. A significant increase in the rate of PROC concepts 
per word is also observed for Gastroenterology and Hepatology across the MCA EHR transition.   
 
1159
--- Page 6 ---
 
 
Figure 4. UMLS Semantic Group c oncept frequencies  across the EHRs at each of Mayo Clinic Arizona and Florida 
sites.  
As a way of quantifying the overall semantic variation between corpora, we also computed the cosine similarities 
between the sums of tf-idf and stf-idf values for each respective corpus pair, as presented in Table 4.  While the tf -idf 
similarities indicate semantic deviation between EHRs (MCA Cerner to Epic = 0.779; MCF Cerner to Epic = 0.618), 
the semantic similarity across sites for the same Epic  EHR was much higher (MCA Epic to MCF Epic = 0.965). The 
semantic similarity was much higher between EHRs at each site when adjusting for specialty using stf-idf (MCA 
Cerner to Epic = 0.941; MCF Cerner to Epic = 0.860) and even higher across sites for the same EHR (MCA Epic to 
MCF Epic = 0.987). These results demonstrate a high degree of semantic sensitivity to  the specialty context.  
Table 4. Cosine similarities of MCA and MCF corpora  
Corpora comparison  tf-idf stf-isf 
MCA Cerner to Epic 0.779  0.941  
MCF Cerner to Epic 0.618  0.860  
MCA Epic to MCF Epic  0.965  0.987  
MCA Cerner to MCF Cerner  0.804  0.952  
  
 
1160
--- Page 7 ---
The top terms by specialty (determined by ranked descending order of stf-idf terms) are listed for each EHR and site 
in Table 5 . The specificity of terms to the specialty under which they are listed demonstrates some validity to the 
approach of weighting terms by medical discipline . For example, in several of the stf-idf models, ab breviations for 
common terms specific to the area of practice (e.g. “eeg”, “mri” for Neurology and “eom”, “hent”, “hi” for 
Emergency Medicine) scored the highest.  
 
Table 5 . Most informative words by specialty  by stf-idf score  
Specialty  Site EHR  Top stf-idf Terms+ 
Internal 
Medicine  AZ Cerner  healthy, age, good, died, regular, subject, pap, thyroid, issues, cholesterol, 
stress, sleep, mammogram, influenza, verified, exercise, hoc, ad, breast, 
vaccine  
Epic adult, ear, provided, bp, good, lesions, lungs, apply, hyperlipidemia, vitamin, 
thyroid, sleep, calcium, risk, stress, diet, healthy, breast, exercise  
FL Cerner  bilateral, surgical , surgery, mass, infection, hypertension, cancer, edema, 
weight, cuff, sleep, cardiac, kg, apnea, breast  
Epic coronary, bang, glucose, index, perioperative, bedtime, hold, vitamin, breast, 
screening, calculated, stop, expected, ear, m², external, apnea, preoperative  
Emergency 
Medicine  AZ Cerner  operate, understand, medicines, rays, emergency, drink, important, received, 
indications, specialist, services, prescriptions, exitcare, seek, materials, 
document, caregiver, orally  
Epic eom, shortness, psychiatric, membranes, resp, nerve, temperature, spo2, 
fever, chills, motion, exhibits, hent, deficit, nu rsing, mucous, moist, ed, 
emergency, vitals  
FL Cerner  hi, neurological, tests, except, such, america, observed, regarding, 
prescriptions, exitcare, materials, account, indications, received, directed, 
seek, hpi, caregiver, emergency, orally  
Epic hent, vomiting, temperature, spo2, resp, emergency, fever, shortness, 
dysuria, eom, moist, states, membranes, chills, mucous, personally, vitals, 
critical, ed, radiology  
Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology  AZ Cerner  forceps, colon, polyp, procedure, examined, mm, signed, preparation, 
mucosa, planned, monitored, duodenum, found, endoscopy, entire, 
procedural, diagnoses, op, scope, sedation  
Epic removal, sexual, consents, social, peripheral, pump, lumen, donor, wdl, 
anesthesia, connections, gastroent erology, catheter, overview, transplant, 
liver, implanted, clean, dressing, sedation  
FL Cerner  colonoscopy, advanced, examined, esophageal, introduced, biopsies, gi, les, 
forceps, reflux, found, esophagus, entire, duodenum, monitored, diagnoses, 
op, endo scopy, procedural, sedation  
Epic lumen, connections, line, ph, swallows, wdl, hepatology, gastroenterology, 
acid, balloon, implanted, reflux, les, sphincter, catheter, esophageal, 
sedation, endoscopy, clean, dressing  
Neurology  AZ Cerner  seizure, headaches, nerve, migraine, mental, visual, intact, reflexes, 
neurology, motor, eeg, tremor, stroke, headache, gait, ms, mri, brain, 
cognitive  
Epic movements, injection, neurology, facial, symmetric, headache, migraine, 
units, motor, eeg, bilaterally, seizure, stroke, seizures, gait, mri, intravenous, 
tremor, brain, cognitive  
FL Cerner  autonomic, head, cervical, mri , emg, headache, neurology, motor, brain, 
nerve, bilaterally, bp, migraine, headaches, nl  
Epic midline, botox, flexion, muscle, symmetric, motor, mr, neu, tremor, touch, 
finger, gait, units, neurology, brain, facial, bilaterally, headache  
+In descending order of stf-idf score  
1161
--- Page 8 ---
Discussion  
This study focused on assessing the degree of heterogeneity in clinical documentation . Toward that end, we sought 
to measure the variations brought on by the practice context (i.e ., EHR), temporal context (i.e. , time), and spatial 
context (i.e. , regional characteristics and demographics of the site) by controlling as much as possible for t he 
physician. We sampled a set of attending physicians at each of the Mayo Clinic Arizona and Florida sites who 
practiced for a full year prior to the start and after the completion of the transition from Cerner to Epic EHR systems 
and analyzed the lexical , semantic, and process variations of each associated clinical note corpus against each other  
using a combination of statistical and visual techniques.  The results suggest that process variations are significant 
over different  EHR system s and different subspecialties while matching as much as possible for physician. 
Moreover, the results also demonstrate a sig nificant variation of semantics between subspecialties using the same 
EHR system at the same site.  
Process  Variation  
The corpus statistics reveal ed a stark contrast in the amount of note types used by Cerner and Epic EHRs. While 
there is a direct mapping of many of the note types (e.g. Cerner “<Specialty> Subsequent Visit” maps to Epic 
“Progress Notes” and Cerner “<Specialty> Consult” maps to Epic’s “Consult – Outpatient”), Cerner contained an 
order of magnitude more note types as they were defined at the specialty level as well as for the type of operation 
being performed (e.g. “Colonoscopy”  in Cerner as opposed to generic “Procedure” in Epic ). Where as almost all 
Epic notes conformed to one of a handful of pre-selected categories, Cerner allows providers to define new note 
types. Further, short communications between current providers and previous or referring providers often labelled as 
a short Misce llaneous Note  instead of appending to Progress Notes . For Epic, these differences resulted in  fewer  
notes that are shorter in length,  set across a narrower  distribution of note types. While the reduction in note types to 
consider has been shown in some cas es to ease physician workflow and increase inter -provider communication of 
patient information due, in part, to the increased utilization of template structures25, 26, this appears to come with the 
tradeoff of less contextual information conveyed in the note type name. For example, the type of procedure for 
which a note is written is not indicated by the note type “Procedure” in Epic but is readily apparent in “EGD” and 
“Colonoscopy” in Cern er. Thus, a n interoperable system attempting to extract this information could establish which 
procedure was performed from  the note type in a Cerner  EHR  but must rely on another source  for Epic  EHR, such 
as header metadata , unless the implementation in Ep ic is specifically  tailored to include that level of information in 
the note types.  
Semantic Variation  
Although  the overall word frequencies per UMLS semantic group concept and their associated Wilcoxon signed -
rank test  p-values listed  in Table 3  exhibit statistically significant differences between EHRs at each site for most 
groups, the illustrated differences in Figure 4 at the specialty level reveal that these variations are attributed mostly 
to a subset, if not individual group. For example, t he differences between the rates of DISO concepts per word 
between EHRs for both sites for Gastroenterology and Hepatology as well as Emergency Medicine were much 
greater than the differences in DISO concepts per word for Internal Medicine and Neurology.  The overall 
statistically significant increase in semantic density (i.e. more UMLS semantic concepts per word for almost every 
semantic category) provides evidence that the Epic EHR system allowed communication of more clinically -relevant 
terms in the note text. However, it is unclear from our data whether that was due to an increase in redundant data, as 
duplicated information in clinical notes has been extensively documented27-30.  
Limitations  
One limitation of this work was the absence of diagnosis matchin g through ICD -code stratifi cation, for instance, to 
account for differences i n clinical cases between the various contexts examined in this study. Some of the observed 
differences in process and semantics, especially, could be attributed to geospatial or  temporal shifts  in the 
prevalence  of dis orders . Such differences could be confounding in our analys es and therefore should be controlled 
for as much as possible in similar  future work.  
Although we were able to compare medical specialty corpora across sites and EHRs, we acknowledge that this 
ignores  the possi ble existence of  more granular subspecialty  sublanguages. For instance, within Gastroenterology 
and Hepatology, physicians subspecialize in  physiological locales such as  particular organs (e.g. liver, esophagus, 
small and large bowel) and often further by procedure and condition, such as Barrett’s Esophagus and eosinophilic 
esophagitis (also known as EOE) for esophageal subspecialists . Since this data on physician expertise within their 
1162
--- Page 9 ---
specialty was not available  and the stf-idf approach did not weigh term s at the subspecialty level  but may influence 
which patient cases those providers are directed toward, we were not able to consider this in our study.  
While it would be informative to consider each  context ual dimension in isolation , the transition of EHR s ystems 
over the course of a year by the same physicians, as opposed to using both EHRs concurrently, prevents us from 
differentiating clinical and temporal context s for the same set of physicians. A future study could hypothetically 
normalize clinical context changes to longitudinal changes in sublanguage trends, inspired by the previous trend 
analysis conducted by Shao et al.12, for instance, to sequester a more precise clinical context change measurement.  
 
Conclusion  
This study aimed to assess the effect of practical and temporal contexts of clinical practice settings by comparing the 
notes of a set of ph ysicians at two Mayo Clinic sites across an EHR migration from Cerner to Epic. Additionally, we 
assessed the effect of the spatial context by compar ing physicians within the same specialty and  who utilized  the 
same integrated EHR  system  (Epic) across the s ites. We evaluated the lexical and semantic variations between these 
corpora by evaluating the word token, document, and concepts distributions to measure whether a statistically 
significant difference occurred between the timeframes and across the EHRs. We found a significant degree of 
variation in process and syntax between EHRs as well as semantic variation between EHRs and specialties at the 
same Mayo Clinic site . That physicians within the same speciality tend to converge onto a  similar subl anguage when 
using the same EHR system  is also worthy of remark . These findings have implications on future  efforts toward  
building portable clinical language models.  
 
Acknowledgements  
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health grant U01TR002062  and R01LM011934 . 
 
 
References  
 
1. Buntin MB, Burke MF, Hoaglin MC, Blumenthal D. The benefits of health information technology: a review 
of the recent literature shows predominantly positive results. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011;30(3):464 -71. 
2. Adler -Milste in J, Jha AK. HITECH Act Drove Large Gains In Hospital Electronic Health Record Adoption. 
Health Affairs. 2017;36(8):1416 -22. 
3. Mennemeyer ST, Menachemi N, Rahurkar S, Ford EW. Impact of the HITECH Act on physicians' adoption of 
electronic health records.  J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2016;23(2):375 -9. 
4. Gold M, Mc LC. Assessing HITECH Implementation and Lessons: 5 Years Later. Milbank Q. 2016;94(3):654 -
87. 
5. Edwards ST, Neri PM, Volk LA, Schiff GD, Bates DW. Association of note quality and quality of care: a 
cross -sectional study. BMJ Quality &amp; Safety. 2014;23(5):406 -13. 
6. Cohen GR, Friedman CP, Ryan AM, Richardson CR, Adler -Milstein J. Variation in Physicians’ Electronic 
Health Record Documentation and Potential Patient Harm from That Variation. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine. 2019;34(11):2355 -67. 
7. Fan JW, Prasad R, Yabut RM, Loomis RM, Zisook DS, Mattison JE, et al. Part -of-speech tagging for clinical 
text: wall or bridge between institutions? AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2011;2011:382 -91. 
8. Glynn EF, Hoffman MA. Heterogeneity introduced by EHR system implementation in a de -identified data 
resource from 100 non -affiliated organizations. JAMIA Open. 2019;2(4):554 -61. 
9. Fu S, Wen A, Schaeferle GM, Wilson PM, Demuth G, Ruan X, et al. Assessment of Data Quality Variability 
across Two EHR Systems through a Case Study of Post -Surgical Complications. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 
2022;2022:196 -205. 
10. Patterson O, Hurdle JF. Document clustering of clinical narratives: a systematic study of clinical sublanguages . 
AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2011;2011:1099 -107. 
11. Doing -Harris K, Patterson O, Igo S, Hurdle J. Document Sublanguage Clustering to Detect Medical Specialty 
in Cross -institutional Clinical Texts. Proc ACM Int Workshop Data Text Min Biomed Inform. 2013;2013:9 -
12. 
12. Shao Y, Divita G, Workman TE, Redd D, Garvin J, Zeng -Treitler Q. Clinical Sublanguage Trend and Usage 
Analysis from a Large Clinical Corpus2020. 3837 -45 p.  
1163
--- Page 10 ---
13. Peterson KJ, Liu H. An Examination of the Statistical Laws of Semantic Change in Clinical  Notes. AMIA Jt 
Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2021;2021:515 -24. 
14. Moon S, He H, Liu H, editors. Sublanguage Characteristics of Clinical Documents. 2022 IEEE International 
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM); 2022 6 -8 Dec. 2022.  
15. Elkin PL, F roehling D, Bauer BA, Wahner -Roedler D, Rosenbloom ST, Bailey K, et al. Aequus communis 
sententia: defining levels of interoperability. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2007;129(Pt 1):725 -9. 
16. Sohn S, Wang Y, Wi C -I, Krusemark EA, Ryu E, Ali MH, et al. Clinic al documentation variations and NLP 
system portability: a case study in asthma birth cohorts across institutions. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association. 2017;25(3):353 -9. 
17. Moon S, Liu S, Chen D, Wang Y, Wood DL, Chaudhry R, et al. Sali ence of Medical Concepts of Inside 
Clinical Texts and Outside Medical Records for Referred Cardiovascular Patients. J Healthc Inform Res. 
2019;3(2):200 -19. 
18. Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, et al. Scikit -learn: Machin e Learning 
in Python. J Mach Learn Res. 2011;12(null):2825 –30. 
19. Eyre H, Chapman AB, Peterson KS, Shi J, Alba PR, Jones MM, et al. Launching into clinical space with 
medspaCy: a new clinical text processing toolkit in Python. AMIA Annu Symp Proc. 2021;20 21:438 -47. 
20. Soldaini L, editor QuickUMLS: a Fast, Unsupervised Approach for Medical Concept Extraction2016.  
21. Harkema H, Dowling JN, Thornblade T, Chapman WW. ConText: an algorithm for determining negation, 
experiencer, and temporal status from clinic al reports. J Biomed Inform. 2009;42(5):839 -51. 
22. Liu H, Bielinski SJ, Sohn S, Murphy S, Wagholikar KB, Jonnalagadda SR, et al. An information extraction 
framework for cohort identification using electronic health records. AMIA Jt Summits Transl Sci Proc . 
2013;2013:149 -53. 
23. Fu S. TRUST: clinical text retrieval and use towards scientific rigor and transparent process. University of 
Minnesota Digital Conservancy: University of Minnesota; 2021.  
24. Grootendorst M. BERTopic: Neural topic modeling with a cl ass-based TF -IDF procedure. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:220305794. 2022.  
25. Koppel R, Lehmann CU. Implications of an emerging EHR monoculture for hospitals and healthcare systems. 
J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2015;22(2):465 -71. 
26. Kahn D, Stewart E, Duncan M, Lee E, Simon W, Lee C, et al. A Prescription for Note Bloat: An Effective 
Progress Note Template. Journal of Hospital Medicine. 2018;13(6):378 -82. 
27. Cohen R, Elhadad M, Elhadad N. Redundancy in electronic health record corpora: analysis, impact on text 
mining p erformance and mitigation strategies. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013;14:10.  
28. Zhang R, Pakhomov S, Melton GB. Longitudinal analysis of new information types in clinical notes. AMIA Jt 
Summits Transl Sci Proc. 2014;2014:232 -7. 
29. Rule A, Bedrick S, Chiang MF, Hribar MR. Length and Redundancy of Outpatient Progress Notes Across a 
Decade at an Academic Medical Center. JAMA Network Open. 2021;4(7):e2115334 -e. 
30. Steinkamp J, Kantrowitz JJ, Airan -Javia S. Prevalence and Sources of Duplicate Information in the Elec tronic 
Medical Record. JAMA Network Open. 2022;5(9):e2233348 -e. 
 
 
 
  
1164